KEP-2887: Enum Types for OpenAPI (#2888)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-api-machinery/2887-openapi-enum-types/README.md

type Protocol string

const (
	// ProtocolTCP is the TCP protocol.
	ProtocolTCP Protocol = "TCP"
	// ProtocolUDP is the UDP protocol.
	ProtocolUDP Protocol = "UDP"
	// ProtocolSCTP is the SCTP protocol.
	ProtocolSCTP Protocol = "SCTP"
)

// ContainerPort represents a network port in a single container
type ContainerPort struct {
  // ...

  // Required: Supports "TCP", "UDP" and "SCTP"
  // +optional
  Protocol Protocol
  
  // ...
}
```

In order to convey that the `Protocol` type is an enum, every field of the type 
have to comment its values like `ContainerPort` does. The same goes for validation - 
protocol being one of "TCP", "UDP", and "SCTP" is duplicated among the code base.

Tools and UIs can also benefit from the additional piece of information. For example,
Protocol can be shown as a dropdown of possible values instead of a textbox.
The user no longer needs to see an error of invalid value after submits the request.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

- Add an annotation that indicates a field as an enum.
- Make the Kubernetes OpenAPI generator recognize the annotation.

> - Auto-detect possible values of an enum types.

Reviewer: Call out that we're doing the migration of the Kubernetes native types? Maybe "Detect and automatically add the enum annotation to all existing enums in the Kubernetes native types"?  If there are any design details of interest around this, they could be added to this KEP as well.

Author: Added a section on the auto-detection of builtin types.

marked as `provisional` is a working document and subject to change. You can
denote sections that are under active debate as follows:

```
<<[UNRESOLVED optional short context or usernames ]>>
Stuff that is being argued.
<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>
```

When editing KEPS, aim for tightly-scoped, single-topic PRs to keep discussions
focused. If you disagree with what is already in a document, open a new PR
with suggested changes.

One KEP corresponds to one "feature" or "enhancement" for its whole lifecycle.
You do not need a new KEP to move from beta to GA, for example. If
new details emerge that belong in the KEP, edit the KEP. Once a feature has become
"implemented", major changes should get new KEPs.

The canonical place for the latest set of instructions (and the likely source
of this file) is [here](/keps/NNNN-kep-template/README.md).

**Note:** Any PRs to move a KEP to `implementable`, or significant changes once
it is marked `implementable`, must be approved by each of the KEP approvers.
If none of those approvers are still appropriate, then changes to that list
should be approved by the remaining approvers and/or the owning SIG (or
SIG Architecture for cross-cutting KEPs).
-->

> # KEP-NNNN: Your short, descriptive title

Author: Oops sorry for missing that out.

const (
  StorageMediumDefault         StorageMedium = ""           // use whatever the default is for the node
  StorageMediumMemory          StorageMedium = "Memory"     // use memory (tmpfs)
  StorageMediumHugePages       StorageMedium = "HugePages"  // use hugepages
  StorageMediumHugePagesPrefix StorageMedium = "HugePages-" // prefix for full medium notation HugePages-<size>
)
```

Here, `StorageMedium` can have infinite number of possible values, which disqualify it as an enum type.

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

The syntax proposed in this KEP is different from existing implementation of kube-builder.
Namely, kube-builder requires possible values in the annotation itself, and is treated
as a validation.
```go
package example

// Alias
// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=Lion;Wolf;Dragon
type Alias string
```

> The two approaches are compatible, but eventually they will have to be unified.

Reviewer 2: @jiahuif you linked me to a location where you were concerned about the impact of this change on generated code.  If someone is using the kubebuilder mechanism and switches to the enum you're providing here, does that trigger the same condition you were concerned about?

Author: No. For kube-builder, the existing enum annotation adds the check to a validation webhook. The generated code does not yet have the enum tag. In this KEP, we are to add enum support to the core types, changes to the ecosystem can be done afterwards.

Author: Correction: I've updated the section about kube-builder. I will add support of the new syntax to kube-builder too.

```go
package core
// ...

// Protocol defines network protocols supported for things like container ports.
type Protocol string

const (
	// ProtocolTCP is the TCP protocol.
	ProtocolTCP Protocol = "TCP"
	// ProtocolUDP is the UDP protocol.
	ProtocolUDP Protocol = "UDP"
	// ProtocolSCTP is the SCTP protocol.
	ProtocolSCTP Protocol = "SCTP"
)

// ContainerPort represents a network port in a single container
type ContainerPort struct {
  // ...

  // Required: Supports "TCP", "UDP" and "SCTP"
  // +optional
  Protocol Protocol
  
  // ...
}
```

In order to convey that the `Protocol` type is an enum, every field of the type 
have to comment its values like `ContainerPort` does. The same goes for validation - 
protocol being one of "TCP", "UDP", and "SCTP" is duplicated among the code base.

Tools and UIs can also benefit from the additional piece of information. For example,
Protocol can be shown as a dropdown of possible values instead of a textbox.
The user no longer needs to see an error of invalid value after submits the request.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

> - Add an annotation that indicates a field as an enum.

Reviewer 3: we call them markers now to avoid confusion

Author: OK, will do a search-and-replace

- Make the Kubernetes OpenAPI generator recognize the annotation.

> - Auto-detect possible values of an enum type.

Reviewer 3: what does this mean?

Author: reword a bit. Deduce values of an enum type from its Go type definition.

> - Detect and annotate enum types in all built-in types. 

Reviewer 3: I want to see kubebuilder support for the new marker as a goal and requirement. Otherwise, we diverge more again between the two worlds.

Author: For kubebuilder, the user may nor may not have correct constants there because they can just specify enum values inline with the marker (built-in types have these constants, though). The strategy would be allow kubebuilder to support both.

Reviewer 4: Please insert something like "a path to converge with kubebuilder's mechanism"

Author: done

Additionally, This KEP makes the following assumptions on the implementation:
- All enum types have their own type alias. i.e. , no raw string enums.
- The canonical definition of a type is written in go and follows the standard 
  Kubernetes convention.

### Enum Pattern

The Enum Pattern of a type, appearing in a go source file, is defined as follows:
```go
package internal

// FooType define sa type alias, underlying type must be string
type FooType string

// in the same package, define constants with the alias
const (
    BarConst FooType = "Bar"
    BazConst FooType = "Baz"
)

// in one or more resources or nested objects, one of the field is of 
// the defined alias type.

// ExampleResource should refer FooType
type ExampleResource struct {
    FooField FooType
}

```
Enum Type is the type that follows such pattern (`FooType` in the example above).
Enum Values are the possible values of the Enum Type (`Bar` and `Baz` are Enum Values for `FooType`).

### Enum Tag
The Enum Tag is the annotation `// +enum` that must be in the closest comment blocks
of an enum type following Enum Pattern.

```go
package internal

// FooType define sa type alias, underlying type must be string

> // +enum

Reviewer 3: this auto-detection considerably diverges from kubebuilder. I see the point though that it avoid errors, and is more convenient. As written above, kubebuilder above should be pre-req for this extension.

Author: updated the section about kube-builder

Consider the following in developing a test plan for this enhancement:
- Will there be e2e and integration tests, in addition to unit tests?
- How will it be tested in isolation vs with other components?

No need to outline all of the test cases, just the general strategy. Anything
that would count as tricky in the implementation, and anything particularly
challenging to test, should be called out.

All code is expected to have adequate tests (eventually with coverage
expectations). Please adhere to the [Kubernetes testing guidelines][testing-guidelines]
when drafting this test plan.

[testing-guidelines]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-testing/testing.md
-->

Testing should focus on `kubernetes/kube-openapi` repository. There will be 
integration tests against cases with valid and invalid definition of enum types.

In the `kubernetes/kubernetes` repository, as part of OpenAPI v3 test suites,
there should be integration and e2e tests that validate present of enum fields. 

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

 - Feature implemented behind the OpenAPI v3 feature gate
 - Initial tests, both in k/k and k/kube-openapi, are completed and enabled

#### Beta

>  - All enums in Kubernetes built-in types have enum tags properly added.

Reviewer 3: Add kubebuilder support here please.

Author: Done

	ProtocolTCP Protocol = "TCP"
	// ProtocolUDP is the UDP protocol.
	ProtocolUDP Protocol = "UDP"
	// ProtocolSCTP is the SCTP protocol.
	ProtocolSCTP Protocol = "SCTP"
)

// ContainerPort represents a network port in a single container
type ContainerPort struct {
  // ...

  // Required: Supports "TCP", "UDP" and "SCTP"
  // +optional
  Protocol Protocol
  
  // ...
}
```

In order to convey that the `Protocol` type is an enum, every field of the type 
have to comment its values like `ContainerPort` does. The same goes for validation - 
protocol being one of "TCP", "UDP", and "SCTP" is duplicated among the code base.

Tools and UIs can also benefit from the additional piece of information. For example,
Protocol can be shown as a dropdown of possible values instead of a textbox.
The user no longer needs to see an error of invalid value after submits the request.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

- Add a marker that indicates a field as an enum.
- Make the Kubernetes OpenAPI generator recognize the marker.
- Deduce values of an enum type from its Go type definition.

> - Detect and annotate enum types in all built-in types. 

Reviewer 5: is this a one time thing? We'll use a one time script to annotation to all types once, review the PR and then forget about the script?

Author: There is the "linter" thing that is also under discussion. The plan is to run the linter for the first time expecting tons of warnings, then check each to see if it is right or false positive. Afterwards, it checks for enums in new types.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

This KEP does not require removal of existing validation of enum types. While OpenAPI-based
of enum types can simplify this type of validation, retiring custom-made validations is out

> of scope.

Reviewer 4: I'd like to reconsider this for GA, I think that's how you know you're done, when you can remove the hand-rolled ones.

Author: Added that  to GA Graduation Criteria.

> This KEP does not consider extensibility of enum values. Any changes to the set of possible values

Reviewer 5: Feel free to use the word "closed enum" if that's what you mean? Also, I don't think that "any changes is considered breaking change" is true

Author: reworded.

> The implementation should only suggest changes to internal APIs. 

Reviewer 4: this is inconsistent with the comments on line 240?

Author: right. This is a revision issue. Updating.

## Proposal

When generating OpenAPI schema, the de facto enum types should be reflected as enums in the resulting schema.

We define enum types with following properties:

> - All enum types are closed, i.e., the type includes a finite number of possible values.

Reviewer 4: Closed enums are a disaster for forward/backwards compatibility, but this KEP doesn't seem to have a discussion of that; I think it should, if we're going to automatically make all of these enums closed. Currently, generated clients won't represent these with closed sets. This would be a big change.

Reviewer 5: They are closed from a server-side perspective (server won't allow any unknown value). Clients, for backwards compatibility reasons, should consider it open (new values are possible).

Author: So, would you suggest always prune the enum fields for clients?

Author: I think this is up to the maintainer of a client. We just give options.

- All enum types should be string. There can be no enum integers, floats, etc

Additionally, This KEP makes the following assumptions on the implementation:
- All enum types have their own type alias. i.e. , no raw string enums.

> - The canonical definition of a type is written in go and follows the standard 

Reviewer 5: Maybe put this sentence first, otherwise it's not clear when you say "their own type alias" that you're referring to the go definition.

Author: true. updated/

  Kubernetes convention.

### Enum Pattern

The Enum Pattern of a type, appearing in a go source file, is defined as follows:
```go
package internal

> // FooType define sa type alias, underlying type must be string

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
// FooType defines a type alias, underlying type must be string
```

type FooType string

// in the same package, define constants with the alias
const (
    BarConst FooType = "Bar"
    BazConst FooType = "Baz"
)

> // in one or more resources or nested objects, one of the field is of 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
// in one or more resources or nested objects, one of the fields is of 
```

// the defined alias type.

// ExampleResource should refer FooType
type ExampleResource struct {
    FooField FooType
}

```
Enum Type is the type that follows such pattern (`FooType` in the example above).
Enum Values are the possible values of the Enum Type (`Bar` and `Baz` are Enum Values for `FooType`).

### Enum Tag
The Enum Tag is the marker `// +enum` that must be in the closest comment blocks
of an enum type following Enum Pattern.

```go
package internal

// FooType define sa type alias, underlying type must be string
// +enum
type FooType string
```

An actual example looks like
```go
package core

// Protocol defines network protocols supported for things like container ports.
// +enum
type Protocol string
```

### Detect Possible Enum Types

> A new API rule will be added to `kube-openapi` that warns about detected Enum Pattern

Reviewer 4: Why would we do this? I'm not sure I see the benefit, especially for alpha/beta.

Author: For post-beta, this linter would warn if the user forget an enum marker. This should be added when it gets close to GA.

Reviewer 4: I still don't see the benefit if we know that there will be false positives anyway.

Author: @apelisse This is the "linter" that detects existing enums during its first run.

Author: False positives are very rare. I've been run a tons of experiments and only find one counter-example. The vest majority are real enums. The linter can prevent the user from forgetting to add the marker.

Author: I suggest we keep the linter for now. If it proves to be little value for maintainers, we can remove it before GA.

Author: omitted for now. we can re-design this part later.

Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

The syntax proposed in this KEP is different from existing implementation of kube-builder.
Namely, kube-builder requires possible values in the marker itself, and is treated
as a validation.
```go
package example

// Alias
// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=Lion;Wolf;Dragon
type Alias string
```
The two approaches are compatible, but eventually they will have to be unified.
To retain compatibility with existing users of kube-builder, the auto-deduction will be added
to kube-builder once the work is done with built-in types.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

### OpenAPI v2 Breakage
This feature, when enabled, breaks existing code using swagger to generate client or server stub from the spec

> for languages with built-in enum support, including Java and C#.

Reviewer 4: IIUC this can be fixed via a preprocessing step; we should just say we'll provide a preprocessor for folks who don't want to update their generator.

Author: This should not be hard considering similar things already done for disabling the feature. added.

Take the following spec as an example.

```yaml
definitions:
  Foo:
    type: object
    properties:
      bar:
        type: string
        enum: 
         - A
         - B
         - C
```

The generated Java object looks like
```java
public class Foo {

  @JsonAdapter(BarEnum.Adapter.class)
  public enum BarEnum {
    A("A"),
    B("B"),
    C("C");
    // ...
  }
  private BarEnum bar = null;
}
```
If the `enum` field was not in the definition, the `Bar` field would be a String.
Maintainers of the clients should include the change in a new major release.

### Enum Fields Pruning for Feature Disablement

> If the feature is disabled through the feature gate, `api-server` will prune the enum fields,

Reviewer 4: Remove enum related aspects from the schema, I hope you mean? pruning them from objects would be disastrous, as would removing the fields from the schema completely.

Author: Yes. It means removing enum related aspects from the schema

Author: Rewording

to kube-builder once the work is done with built-in types.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

### OpenAPI v2 Breakage
This feature, when enabled, breaks existing code using swagger to generate client or server stub from the spec
for languages with built-in enum support, including Java and C#.
Take the following spec as an example.

```yaml
definitions:
  Foo:
    type: object
    properties:
      bar:
        type: string
        enum: 
         - A
         - B
         - C
```

The generated Java object looks like
```java
public class Foo {

  @JsonAdapter(BarEnum.Adapter.class)
  public enum BarEnum {
    A("A"),
    B("B"),
    C("C");
    // ...
  }
  private BarEnum bar = null;
}
```
If the `enum` field was not in the definition, the `Bar` field would be a String.
Maintainers of the clients should include the change in a new major release.

> If, for some reason, a client does not want enum fields to be generated, a simple preprocessor

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If, rather than update code generator or use of the generated client, a client would prefer enum fields to be strings as they were previously, a simple preprocessor
```

(or anything else indicating that this is a solution for the immediately preceding concern and not just a random paragraph :) )

will be provided to prune the enum information similar to that of `api-server` (see below).

### Enum Fields Pruning for Feature Disablement

If the feature is disabled through the feature gate, `api-server` will remove all aspects about

> enum types from the schema, making the result identical to that of the current version.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
enum types from the schema, making the result identical to that of the prior format.
```
